There's some pretty strictly good
applications of AI that we can drive to
really think how can we apply AI to
actually completely solve all disease.
Biochemists over the last 50 years,
they've been working out these protein
structures by hand. And now we've taken
all of that data and trained a neural
network to go just from the input of
what is this molecule description to try
and predict all of that data. That's
where it begins. That's where the
terminator starts. It's always the
innocent dreamer who says this can
change the world for such good.
[Music]
This is Star Talk special edition. Neil
deGrasse Tyson, your personal
astrophysicist. Special edition means
we've got Gary O'Reilly in the house.
Gary. Hi Neil. Former soccer pro
apparently. Yeah. And soccer announcer.
Yes, definitely. And you still do that,
don't you? I do, Chuck. Nice, baby. Hey,
announcing that I know nothing about
soccer. You're in my club then.
Announcing that you are American.
American dog on it. Real football
violence.
So, we're talking about AI today. That's
a favorite topic. We We revisit that
often. Only Only the future of the
entire world.
AI as it matters in biology. Oh, wow.
Now, that's a big deal. I know. Uh-huh.
I know. Yeah, cuz people thinking about,
you know, composing your term paper or
or winning a chess or but it's got a
whole frontier ready to be explored and
so tell me what you and your producers
cooked up today. Okay, so we've been on
the case to get these guys involved for
some time, but they are so busy. So here
we go. I'll say it. I'm made of
proteins. Yes, you're made of proteins
from strings of amino acids that fold
into shapes that put all together form
us. But there's a fundamental problem in
biology. Mhm. That has implications for
all of medicine. How do these proteins
fold up? Oh. For this solution, we
looked at AI and a Google deep mind tool
called Alphafold.
The second iteration of Alphafold 2 won
the Nobel Prize in chemistry last year
for answering this very question. Who
knew AI was smart, huh? Um, now AI win
all the Nobel prizes, right? Yeah, just
give them to now. Just pack them all up.
Pack them up. Now, the Isomorphic Labs
together with Google DeepMind developed
and released AlphaFold 3. Yes, we're on
the third iteration. And that was last
year and applied these new AI models for
drug discovery. Oh, that's great. All
right, so think this through. Could our
next generations of treatments be
computergenerated?
Oh, yeah. Oh, by the way, Neil, let's
introduce our guest. I will. And we've
got Max Yaderberg. Did I pronounce that
correctly? Yeah, you got it. You got it
right. Let's hear you say it. Yeah.
Let's hear you say it. Me say it. Yeah.
Max Yoderberg. That's exactly what I
said.
He copied. He was practicing. He was
practicing. So you studied AI at Oxford.
That's right. That's right. I hear
that's a that's a community college.
Oxford. Oxford Community College. That's
exactly right. In Oxford, England. Yes.
So specialized in deep learning
algorithms. I got your little bio here
for understanding images. Nice. That was
a big advance when when a search can go
into an image. I thought, you know, I'd
died and gone to to computer heaven
where that started. Yeah. Yeah. I mean,
you know, this this was 1015 years ago
back before AI was cool, right? Um where
you know, you talk about AI and it's
something from a sci-fi book, but
understanding images and videos was like
the big thing at that point in time. We
couldn't actually do that. I searched my
9,000 images on my computer for the word
telescope and it found telescope written
in Chinese on a photo taken at an angle
in one of my images when I was visiting
China. Yeah, this is it. Like during my
PhD, we took all of the BBC's back
catalog. No. and we ran my algorithm
across it and created a search engine.
So you could pull up footage from
decades ago that had this text or these
objects. And so that's seriously some
when you do that, do you tie? So when
the AI is looking at an image, it's not
seeing the image the way we do. We're
not even seeing a whole image. Our
brains, we're we're really just
intuiting an image when we see it as how
we do it. But the AI, it's like a
holistic process. Holistic processing AI
actually sees the image and what it's
seeing is pixels. That's right. And it
really all it's doing is just oh this
pixel, this pixel, this pixel in this
arrangement that's this image. So do you
tie that to language and that's how we
search or is the search just the AI
knows the actual image itself? This was
like the big breakthrough back then when
I was doing my PhD and this is what deep
learning as well is all about, right?
You can imagine if you have this pix
this image full of pixels, how do you
actually code up how to read text from
there? How do you tie it to the language
of the text, right? It's unimaginably
hard to code that up by hand. Yes. So
instead, what what you do is you you you
put these what they're called neural
networks. They look at all of the pixels
of the image and and you give it lots
and lots of examples of images that have
somewhere it's got the text in it and
you tell the neural network what the
text is. I see. And a neural network
through lots and lots of training starts
to work out its internal algorithm to
extract the information from these
pixels, piece it all together and spit
out the actual text or spit out what the
objects are. Wow. So you're currently
chief AI officer at Isomorphic Labs.
This is a biology place. That's right.
Do you have any biology in your
background? Formal biology? No. No.
Okay. No. So they want you for your AI.
That's right. That's right. So I I I was
at a place called Deep Mind beforehand.
Google Google Deep Mind. Exactly. Um I
was there for a long time. I absolutely
love this this core AI technology called
deep learning. That's what I've been
developing my whole career so far. At
Deep Mind, we were working on some crazy
stuff, you know, learning to play chess
and go and beating top professionals at
games like Starcraft. You know, back
then it was about that was a big deal.
Yeah. And and because the world didn't
know what AI was, so we were trying to
prove that this was even a thing, right?
Right? It seems crazy now, but back then
it was just proving that this was
actually a real thing. But at the core,
you know, I love this technology. I want
to see it have profound impact on our
world. And I was thinking these things
where it begins. Yep. That's where
Terminator starts. It's always the
innocent dreamer
who says, "This can change the world for
such good and it's in my closet now.
Would you like to see?" Exactly. And
then it's always like some evil
businessman who's just like with my
weather machine I will one day rule the
world you know so apart apart from that
carry on. Yes the good thing is there's
some pretty strictly good applications
of AI that we can drive and um you know
Demis yes started isomorphic labs
spinning that out of Google deep mind to
really think how can we apply AI to
actually you know completely solve all
disease. Okay. So, it has genetic links
back to its origin story. It was in deep
mind. I feel better about that now.
Okay. I'm happier now. Yes. So, I moved
over as part of that founding team to
head up AI in this space and um you
know, it's been about three and a half
years now. Been a crazy journey, but
it's it's fascinating. It's so much fun.
So, you got this AI expertise and
AlphaFold spins off this biological
application of it. First, tell me the
word isomorphic. What does that mean in
biology? Isomorphic is this is this
technical term which is you know a
onetoone mapping of of of space right
and the reason we're called isomeorphic
labs is is really that we believe that
biology is really really complicated in
in in in the world of physics we can
write down equations for physics with
maths and maths is that perfect
description language for physics but you
can't really just write down equations
in maths for biology for the cell is
just too complicated biology is the most
complex expression of chemistry that we
know Oh, that's just there's just so
many moving parts. Did you just make
that up? Yeah, that's we're looking for
a rose at the stone here for for the
language of biology. Exactly. So, so
what could be that perfect description
language for biology? We believe AI and
machine learning is that so that there
could exist an isomorphism, a mapping
between the biological world and the
world of AI, machine learning, hence the
name. Hence the name. Gotcha. Gotcha.
Gotcha. All right. So uh tell us about
protein folding because you know when we
learn about chemistry we learn about
chemical reactions and we're not really
taught that the shape of the molecule
should have anything to do with
anything. It's just what is the chemical
symbol and when you write down the
chemical equations there there's no
shape in there. There's just what
elements and molecules right comprise
it. So, and and those and those
equations don't really ever represent
the three-dimensional nature. Exactly.
You don't even know which if it's it has
handedness. Yes. Right. So, take us from
there. We think about proteins. Proteins
are these fundamental building blocks of
life. Yeah. They're inside of everyone.
They make up everything we we have
basically. And they're made up of of
what's called a sequence of amino acids.
Each amino acid is a molecule. Mhm.
There's about 20 different amino acids
and you put them together in a long or
just in life. In in in life, you can
have non-natural amino acids as well
that you that you can make as well. You
can make them. You can make them and
actually use those for drugs. Sometimes
you string these amino acids together
and that becomes a protein, but they
don't exist as these strings. They fold
up spontaneously in the cell, right, to
create these 3D shapes. And why that's
important is that these proteins,
they're basically molecular machines.
They don't just exist by themselves.
They actually like create these little
pieces of machinery. They they interact
with other proteins. They interact with
other biomolelecules like DNA and RNA.
Right. Um and that interaction is a
shape fitting. Exactly. Exactly. So
these proteact
3D jigsaw puzzle and it's not static.
This is way harder than a 2D jigsaw
puzzle. And these are not static things.
It's not just static puzzle pieces
coming together. They change shape. So
something comes in contact and that
opens up something else on the other
side of the protein which changes the
machine and and on and on it goes. And
that's what I was going to ask you. What
speeds is this folding taking place? Is
it continuous? Once it folds, that's it.
But you've just told me, no, it just
keeps moving through the whole thing.
Yeah, these these these are really
really complex dynamical systems, you
know, composed of, you know, thousands,
millions, trillions of atoms within our
cells unfolding over the course of, you
know, micros secondsonds and and and
beyond. And this dynism that you're
talking about, what word is that?
Dinism. That's a word. Isn't that a
word? Dinism. I think I just made it up.
Oh, dynism. No, dynamism. Dynamism.
Thank you. I'm correcting grammar. This
is a first. This is
dynamism. Dynamism. Kind of dinosaur.
Dynamism. Dinosaur. Dinosaurs. Dinosaur.
Not dinosaur. But the dynamism that
you're talking about within the cell
when you look at each one of us since
each one of us is so different even
though there's a general like execution
and blueprint we all come out so
different. Is that part of the process
that you are looking at and mapping? I I
would say to a jellyfish we all look
identical. True. Okay. They're not
saying oh is your skin color slightly
different or you slightly taller. Yes.
You're describing functions at a
cellular level. Is your job to
understand that or is your job to figure
out extra ways to fold proteins that
maybe biology has yet to even figure out
that can then solve problems that we
encounter that the natural universe has
not. So, oh that was a good question.
So, you're happy with yourself today? So
happy with yourself. So happy with
myself today. Yeah. This is really
interesting. We we have these little
molecular machines, these proteins and
we care about that 3D structure and how
they work for two reasons. One, we want
to understand, you know, how our cells
work because if something goes wrong
with that, which is the case for
disease, then we want to understand,
okay, where can we or where do we
actually need to go in and start fixing
that, right? And how we can stop it from
actually going wrong in the first place.
Exactly. Exactly. So, that that's one
thing. And then when we think about,
okay, how can we go and fix that? What
we're actually saying when we're doing
drug design, we're saying can we create
another molecule that will come into the
cell and actually start modulating these
molecular machines, it's going this this
drug molecule is going to actually
attach to this protein over here and
that's going to cause this protein to
change shape for example and so it won't
operate how it normally does or and so
we stop that protein working or we make
it work better. These are the sort of
things we do in kind of reminds me of
messenger RNA
vaccines that we develop for co Yeah.
You know, there's so many different
types of molecular mechanisms that we
take advantage for for drug design. Wow.
Are the folding proteins generally
following a set pattern in the way that
they do fold and you're able to map them
and when they misfold, that's when
you're able to flag that up. Or have I
just reinvented something or talked
rubbish? That would be cool. No, no,
you're you're you're on to something.
So, so great. So you know like the I
mean the amazing thing is that we can
actually turns out predict how these
proteins fold. So they are so modeling
that yeah we're modeling that with deep
learning with neural networks. That's
what alphafold you know and all its
generations are all about. And um that
means that we can actually just take in
a sequence of amino acids knowing
nothing about this protein before and
then get out the 3D structure. And
normally this would take people months
if not years to work out this 3D
structure. So, how is it that AlphaFold
knows how a large molecule wants to
fold? Again, it's got to know that in
some way. It it's it's learned this from
a few hundred,000 examples. So,
chemists, biochemists over the last 50
years, they've been working out these
protein structures by hand. They've been
literally synthesizing protein,
crystallizing it, then shooting X-rays
at this to like look at the electron
scattering and from that you can resolve
the protein structure. It's it's a
pretty hard process, but people have
been doing that. That's your way to
photograph what the shape of the
molecule. That's a way to photograph in
reality with the with that kind of it's
basically an electron microscope at that
level. Yeah. Similar. It's like electron
scattering. Yeah. Exactly. And so people
have been doing that for the last 50
years and depositing these structures.
And now we've taken all of that data and
trained a neural network to go just from
the input of what is this molecule
description to try and predict all of
that data. Right? And the amazing thing
is and this this is really remarkable is
that you can then train this on the last
50 years of data. That's a couple of
hundred thousand protein and
biomolelecular systems. But you can
apply it seemingly to everything we know
about in the protein universe in the
proteome. It has proteeration
with its predictions because AI's been
around a little while as you've already
said and you're not the only AI tool
that's out there but how accurate is
this particular tool? Yes. So, so
Alphold 2, right, was that big jump
where we started to get experimental
level accuracy for just proteins and
that's what won the Nobel Prize. So, you
balance it off against empirical
experiment. The benchmark is doing the
real lab work itself, right? So, Alpha 2
reached that level. Now, AlphaFold 3
expands from just just proteins to
incorporate other biomolelecular types.
So proteins with other proteins,
proteins with DNA, with RNA, with what's
called small molecules, which are the
neighborhood, they start mixing all that
up. Or maybe not the neighborhood. Maybe
that neighborhood gets a little bit of
an upgrade.
No, that's that's when you make the
superhuman so
it's not going to be the Terminator.
It's going to be the superhuman. And
then they're going to be like us and
they're going to look down on us and go,
you know, why do we need you guys? And
that's it. So anyway, you're able to
predict these and has have you actually
taken any of the modeled predictions and
made the proteins? Yeah. Oh yeah. Or or
tell us where you expect these to lead
to new and innovative drugs cuz
otherwise it's just a it's just a puzzle
exercise. Yeah. It's a great Lego set.
Lego set.
We want the guests to enjoy this. Yeah.
It's like, "Oh my god, how much that
Lego set cost?" Only $10 billion.
[Laughter]
Sorry. Go ahead. Yeah. Yeah. So, so, so
if you take a particular disease and we
we, you know, we we we think that we can
actually, you know, solve this disease
by modulating a particular protein. Mhm.
The question is how we do that. So, we
design a drug molecule and we want it to
fit to this protein in a certain way.
Oh. And so this is where traditionally
you would have to actually either just
guess or go into
crystallize each one of those
combinations and then photograph them
and see if it worked. But now you can
model it and the AI can do a thousand of
those in like a minute. Isn't this what
you call the target target proteins?
Yes. Wow. So if you know you've got a
certain target protein, do you not then
run that against a list of drugs and
think this one drug A works better with
this or maybe it's drug D or whichever
letter of the alphabet you're on and now
we become the sort of detective and has
this Alpha Fold 3 produced how many
clues and how many answers or are we
still grappling? Yeah. Instead of trying
to figure out the drug, the AI actually
figures out the drug for you. Drug
discovery. Well, exactly. You know, if
you let the guy speak, we might hear the
the two of you. Okay. We're figuring out
this whole industry ourselves, Gary.
Yes. Yeah. You know, this is exactly
what where it's going. So, right, we can
start actually rationally designing
these drugs, right? Traditionally, you
would take, you know, a million random
molecules and you would just throw them
at these proteins and see what sticks.
And and and that's how so many drugs
have been created historically. Yeah.
you you go back further and you're
sifting through mud to find these sort
of molecules. This is why there's been
such a a low percentage of success rates
with the sort of drugs for whatever the
problem is. That's part of it because,
you know, we we we we don't necessarily
understand how these molecules are
working. M but with something like
Alphaold 3 you can you know put the
molecule put the target protein into the
system into the into the neural network
and you get out the 3D structure and as
a chemist you can start to understand
okay how is it this small molecule drug
modulating this protein now still the
problem is well how do you find that
small molecule in the first place that's
going to be good for this protein you
know it's estimated there's like 10 to
the^ of 60 possible drug-like molecules
out there that's you know 10 with 60
zeros is so even people know what 10 to
the 16 yeah
so don't be rude
even if you had the perfect alpha fold
you'd have to run that across 10 ^ the^
60 molecules which is just
computationally impossible it's
unfeasible right until quantum computing
until
and so then what we need is is something
that we call a generative model or an
agent which is able to actually search
through that space understand that
entire entire molecular space and come
up with molecule designs for you. Oh,
cuz the 10 to the 60 is if you just did
it randomly. Exactly. Right. Right. But
just throwing it out anyway. Right.
Right. If you don't do it randomly, then
you can Yeah. But but but randomly is
the state-of-the-art method, right? That
That's how people do it. It's how people
currently do it. That's how people
currently do it. Well, he call it
state-of-the-art. You're the state of
the art. Well, thank you. Let's let's
use the word properly here. So what if
what if the protein turns left when
you've predict when you've mapped it to
turn right. Is that when we have issues
that even Alpha Fold 3 has a problem
with? Exactly. These are uh not perfect
models at the end of the day. They're
very very accurate, but they will make
some mistakes. So you still do currently
need to go into the lab occasionally,
but the amount of lab work you have to
do is so much less, right, than and and
you and often you can find the area of
molecular space where these these models
work, you know, really really well. And
we then go out to the lab later down the
line, we crystallize these things and we
see, yeah, like this is a perfect
mapping of what the model predicted.
All right. So, back to an earlier point.
Yeah. In the old days, like last month,
you the the pharmaceutical companies,
big pharma, would spend millions, maybe
not quite a billion, hundreds of
millions of dollars developing a drug.
We think that, holding aside what might
be abuses of pricing, the fact that it
there's some truth to this first pill
Mhm. cost $50 million. The second pill
cost 10 cents because they had to
research to get the formula for that
first pill. If you have narrow the
search space, then the cost of
developing that first pill can be
manifold smaller. I mean, it costs on
average $3 billion to create a new drug.
Wow. That's that's that's that's on
average. Yeah. And so yeah, there's a
that was low when I said hundred
billion. You were lowballing was
lowballing it. Okay. Um, so this is a
massive opportunity to like completely
change just like the cost, the speed,
the business model, the efficacy and the
business model as we do that. Is it
proprietary? So here's my real cuz
here's where you would revolutionize. So
if I come up with it and I'm I'm company
A, right? It's mine and I get to
determine everything. If you're an AI
company and you're just doing this,
okay, so that you can sell it, then it's
yours. Which one will be will make
prices lower for the consumer? Our goal
is to is to like really redefine this
way you do drug design so it becomes so
much cheaper. We have so much more
abundance of potential drugs and
chemical matter that it really does
change the business model and it changes
the economics of the space. So you can
actually revolutionize
the the cost of making drugs. Yeah,
that's that's where we're going. That's
where we're going. All right. is one of
satisfied is one of the next steps with
alpha fold whichever it's three or maybe
the next iteration or so going to
investigate why and what drives the
misfolding of a protein so as you can
kind of get ahead of even the story of
that happening. Wow. So so actually the
misfolding of a protein is another thing
that that's what causes some types of
disease. Yeah. where you'll have a
genetic mutation, a mutation in your DNA
which will change a particular amino
acid in that protein and so it doesn't
fold the normal way it should fold and
so it doesn't function as as it normally
should as a molecular machine and so
things like alphafold can help us
understand what are those mutations that
cause misfolding they're called
misssense mutations right and then you
know these could be potential drug
targets so we could you know think about
molecules that could you know mitigate
against that if I understand correctly
If you look at the the PDR, it is this
thick. And what's PDR? The physician's
desk reference. Thank you. Uh is this
thick. So it's the size of an old style
Manhattan phone book. Okay. It's very
thick, multiple inches across. And it's
chalk full of existing medicines
available to the doctor to prescribe. Is
it true that 100% of those medicines are
interacting with the patient chemically
rather than through protein folding?
So that if that's the case, does that
mean that where proteins misfold, we
can't combat it with any kind of folding
algorithm? We just prescribe
chemistry for your body to handle the
impact of that. Is that did I say any of
that right? I think that that that is
the majority of drugs. They are they are
chemicals that we take. We are we you
know chemical is not going to fix the
fold. It's going to treat the symptoms
of the of the misfolding that happen.
We're not we're not changing the
mutations of the proteins. That that
could be something like gene therapy. Um
but these are these are chemicals that
come in and will attach themselves to
these proteins and somehow mitigate the
you know something like a misfold or
it'll change an interface change how
these molecular machines work.
That's why is there a particular disease
isomorphic labs are focusing upon right
now or is this a more of a broad
spectrum? Let's do let's let's go for
proteins and cherry pick out certain
things or we really looking at one
particular the technology we're creating
it's really really general. We want to
be able to apply this drug design engine
on any protein any target any disease
area that comes our way. Now saying that
you know practically as a company and
and you want to focus on a particular
area we're focusing at the moment on you
know a lot on cancer course and a lot on
immunology of course two biggies and the
two that probably lend themselves best
to what you're trying to accomplish
actually. Okay. The question everyone's
going to want me to ask right now that's
watching this and listening to this is
how you getting on?
Would I mean it's going really well to
be honest. um we're seeing these
algorithms actually, you know, change
the way that we're able to do drug
design. We're able to discover, you
know, completely novel chemical matter
against some of these targets that, you
know, people have been working on for,
you know, even over a decade, right? So,
really, really hard stuff. Making
amazing progress. Still still really
early in the company, but um it's super
exciting. And have you sent anything to
be photographed yet?
We we we we sent some things for for
molecular photographs. Yeah. Okay. Yeah.
Yeah. I know you're not allowed to talk
about it. I know. I get it. But we're
all very happy. Okay. There you go.
That's Listen, I'm I'm with you. I'm
picking up what you're putting down.
That's cool. Yeah. But so if you if you
I see this work as fundamental research
so that you publish a result, you
publish the image as they published the
image of the DNA molecule to know that
it was a double helix. That becomes
public knowledge at that point. So
someone with tools access to AlphaFold
3, would any company have access to this
once you have published the blueprint
for it? In in drug design, often these
blueprints come out in the patents. So
when you're when you're going to go into
clinical trial, you need to patent these
molecules and in those patents, you'll
have a lot of data around the molecules,
the formula, how they work. I was
talking about earlier. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
Okay. Yeah. All right. So the
immune system, the the cancer Mhm. These
are leading causes of malades in this
world. What of the genetic disorders
that affect one in 100,000 people? Wow.
You you bring them together, there's
enough of them, you know, they'll fill a
stadium in the world, but that's so
uncommon as to not really trigger
anybody's interest. Yeah. It's also not
profitable because you don't have you
don't have enough of a market there to
sell the drug. I mean, you know, it's
exactly that that point, Chuck. It's um
traditionally it might not be that
attractive commercially to go after, you
know, very small patient populations.
But in a world where it's so much
cheaper, so much easier to get to these
drug molecules, then that opens up like
all of this space. The cheaper it is,
the the easier you can justify going
down that risk. Down the risk list. And
this is a big guiding star for us. Like
that's this is why we're doing this.
That's beautiful. I see what you did
there. Guiding star. Yeah. You know, it
would be great though. He's picked up in
the environment. He's not sitting. How's
chief AI officer? Yeah. I'm interested
to how active the company is in shaping
policy around what you're doing because
there's going to be a great deal of
legislative policy that is going to be
tied to what you're doing. All the
patent implications, there's going to
be, you know, research implications.
There going to be a lot of things tied
to this. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, we've
been talking in this conversation about
drug design, but then once you've
designed the drug, you've got to go into
patients in clinical trials and that's a
really long process. Yeah. Which is why
we have mice. But even these mice
models, they're not actually very
predictive. Like you do all these
studies in mice and then they don't, you
know, it doesn't translate into success
in people, right? You got to go up the
evolutionary scale and then get to the
human bit. Yeah. Exactly. And so
there's, you know, you can imagine a
world where we can design loads of new
drugs. we've got to be changing the way
that we're doing clinical trials, you
know, how we can actually get these
drugs to patients who really really need
them in a timely manner. Um, so I think
there's a lot to be done and like
rethought that rethought that is the
ultimate goal for AlphaFold and I think
medical science as a whole to be able to
bespoke medication for you as the
individual rather than the broader
spectrum medication that we find
ourselves with all the side effects. So,
are you able to then design a drug or a
medication that has zero side effects
and works exactly for me? This is the
goal, right? This is this is what we're
shooting for. You know, imagine a world
where we can sequence your particular
cancer mutations, right? And then based
on those your individual mutations be
generating specific drugs for you,
right? That even these are like, you
know, 3D printed or something around the
corner. Okay. Yeah. This is um we're not
there yet, right? We're in the very nent
stages of that right now with the
imunotherapy for cancer treatments and
but how many of these yet to be cured
diseases lend themselves to solutions
that involve protein folding and how
many are just plain old oldfashioned
chemistry. Proteins make up like pretty
much all of our molecular machinery. So
there's there's a class of disease which
is due to misfolding but then there's
many many other diseases which are due
to for example a protein not being
expressed properly or you know a cell
going wrong in a certain tissue. If I
have a bacterial infection I give myself
antibacterial chemicals and then I'm
done. Do I need you for that? But those
chemicals are interacting with the
proteins in the bacteria. Okay. So
proteins are the fundamental machinery
and the chemicals which are drugs are
modulating those proteins whether it's
like in our cells in bacteria. All
right. So it's basically everything
you're talking about is it's all
happening on the cellular level. If what
you're describing is happening inside of
cells, proteins doing their thing, the
3D jigsaw puzzle and you have a solution
for that a remedy. You have to get your
remedy inside the cell to interact with
that folding the delivery system. And
how do you do that other than through
like a Trojan horse virus or something?
Cuz viruses get in there pretty uh on
command. Yeah. Well, if you think about
the drugs that you take as pills, drug
design is really hard because it's not
just about targeting these proteins. We
got to get them to the right place. We
might want a pill that you take. So you
take this pill, it's got to be absorbed
by the body. So it's got to be soluble,
right? It's got to go through the gut
wall. It's got to go through the
bloodstream to the particular tissue
type, the cell type you care about. then
it's got to go through the cell membrane
to be able to actually target maybe a
target which is within the cell. So you
need all of these properties in a single
molecule. So we're actually designing
these molecules not just to hit the
protein but also to be soluble to be
cell permeable. There's so many
different factors and then you don't
want this molecule to be toxic. So you
want it to hit the target of interest
but not hit anything else. So I can see
how a molecule gets through the cell
wall. Yeah. a simple molecule, but a a
fullup protein, red-blooded protein,
how's that getting through the cell
wall? Exactly. There's different types
of drugs. Some are what we call small
molecules, things you could take as
pills. Others are made from proteins
there. They're often things that you
would inject directly inside. So you um
and some of those might be cell
permeable. They would be things like
peptides, but often these these protein
based drugs, things like antibodies, uh
they're injected, but they don't go in
the cell. they're just interacting with
proteins on the surface of cells. So,
you don't need that permeability. So, it
really depends on what your target is
and how do you want people to be able to
take that drug. Sometimes a pill is the
best thing, but actually sometimes
injecting is the best thing. Yes. And
remind me what a peptide is. A peptide
is a really small protein. Um, so you
got full-blown proteins which are these
big molecular machines and then you've
got small proteins um made up of, you
know, five to 50 amino acids. Those are
peptides. Those are peptides. They're
smaller. So in sometimes in some
configurations they can get through the
cell wall.
So with this computer science are we
upending chemistry as we've known it and
are we going to find it kind of moving
off even with AI with the AI is it then
sort of moving into the other sciences?
Are we going to just see it stick in one
particular area? Chemistry is always
going to exist. It's it it it's like I
to me it's like any field of science at
the moment doing science like chemistry
without maths. You wouldn't think about
that now. And it's going to be the same
thing with AI. It already is in my mind.
You just wouldn't do chemistry without
AI. You wouldn't do biology without AI.
It's just that fundamental tool that
allows us to understand the world
better. So chemists will not one day be
like coal miners. Just like I remember
my grandpappa used to go into the lab.
So it's going back to an issue coming
home smelling like chemicals.
Who's actually going to be able to
access Alpha Fold 3 or AIS of this
iteration? Is it exclusively Isomeorphic
Labs or this comes out in license? I
want a home kit. That's it. Exactly.
Right. Right. Right. My DNA goes in.
There's an alpha fold going on. Out
comes a pill and I take it and I don't
even need you at that point. That would
be so cool. You just finger prick or
like put your finger on a sensor or
something and it figures it all out.
Make your own pill in the at home. Home.
Yeah. Yeah. Look up the Thranos story
for that one.
Wow. That's the woman that went to
prison, right? But no, you can access
Alphafold. So if you search for Alphold
server, um there's a whole web-based
system where you can you can fold
proteins there for, you know, academic
use. It's it's it's really cool. So you
can just put your system in, get the 3D
fold out from Alfold 3, download it.
Yeah. Oh, cool, man. I mean, how far
away are we from modeling an entire
human being, which I suppose touches
onto your fears? Modeling or creating?
Either or. Once you model, Mhm. the next
step is creating. Yeah, that's true.
That's all there is to it. That's true.
That that's the dream. We kind of need
to work up the scales here. So, you
know, we we we can model how two atoms
interact. We can write down those
equations. We can simulate small atomic
systems. With things like alpha fold, we
get into bigger atomic systems, things
on the scale of like multiple proteins.
Now we've got very very accurate alpha
3. Maybe we can actually bootstrap off
that to get to more sort of even bigger
systems, what we call pathways, how all
of these things interact. It's only just
now clicking within me because you can
look up in a book the tables of um
action potentials for the interactions
of of atoms and molecules. And so you'd
have a very good sense of which
molecules will combine. Is it
exothermic? Is it endothermic? But these
are atoms and molecules. And as powerful
and as convenient as that is, that's
just the first rung in this ascending
ladder of complexity that you are
gaining control over. Yeah. And there's
there's trillions of atoms within a
single cell, let alone the whole human
body, right? It's just unfeasible to
simulate the whole thing. But what you
can do is you can, you know, we do have
good measurement techniques at different
levels of scale. So we can measure
things like protein folding. We can
measure the amount of protein within a
cell. We can measure the number of cells
of certain type within a tissue. And so
we have these the bigger it is, the
easier it would be to measure. So we
have these little windows into this sort
of microscopic world. And then we can
use AI to sort of fill in the gaps and
bootstrap off the stuff we can do well
the the atomic level and start building
up that scale of modeling. If that makes
it I read this article like god knows
how long ago. God, how long did read the
article? Because you know, God
anyway, it was talking about when a
fertilized cell starts to uh proliferate
and become a person. And basically what
it determined, what the scientists
determined at that point, and this is
many years ago, is that the only way
that could describe it is there's a
bunch of noise. Like there's just a
bunch of noise. We can't really see
anything. We can't make sense of any of
it because it's just basically if we
were to look at it as data it would just
be noise. Are you able to pierce that
veil and see into that? I mean we we
haven't been looking at that specific
thing. Okay. But this is where you start
to understand more about you know a
really granular scale and then you you
can integrate that and create these sort
of I don't know coarser measurements and
and coarser predictions. This is what we
do in in lots of areas of science,
right? We we don't simulate the whole
universe at the atomic scale, but we we
find these rules of thumb or ways to
describe sort of broader collections of
molecules and that's what we can start
to build up and actually learn with
these neural networks. Cool.
So, question on behalf of Chuck. Could
Alpha discover a hallucinogenic that
could make him see God
or any other deity or being? Thank you
for asking. Welcome. I would like a very
real answer, please.
You You can go on the Alphael server and
try that out. Okay. All right.
Invitation. Hey, listen. I'm all about
it. So, we've looked at in previous
shows talking to Biome Medical
Engineering. And if we are to travel off
world and deep space, we are probably
going to need a different upgrades for
us to be able to do that. Can we are we
going to be able to with Alpha Fold or
AI like this be able to upgrade
ourselves to make this sort of deep
space travel or or upgrade ourselves for
anything any needi
you know yeah now now we're sort of
beyond you know solving disease into
like actually can we enhance ourselves
right I don't know I think like there's
there's probably potential right to to
think about creating chemical matter
that we can take or ingest that that I
mean aging alone would be a huge
application for this. I mean, there's
crazy research on aging. Aging is
basically cellular degeneration
and if you're able to on a molecular
level kind of restart that process or
jumpst start it or you know boost it.
Aging is an interesting one. You know,
this is a really nent area of research
where people are just starting to work
out what are some of the um factors that
that reverse the age of cells are these
things called Yamanaka factors. Yes. Um,
and there's even potential that people
are finding of creating molecules that
stabilize particular protein. Yamanaka
factors are proteins. They're
transcription factors that read DNA can
stabilize these things. Maybe that is
what reverses some of the age of cells.
This is super nent. So, what is the
connection between wanting to modify a
genome and your ability to fold proteins
to interact with our physiology? I asked
that because I'm reminded there was a
scene in the film Gatka where they they
didn't manipulate your genome, but they
selected your pre-existing genome for
certain properties. And there's a person
giving a piano recital and it was very
rich sound. I mean, it was beautiful.
And then the camera came around to the
front and the person had 12 fingers.
That's right. And
bread for that. Yes. Right. You get two
extra notes for every for everything.
Right. Everything going on. She could
only play the stuff like nobody could
play with. Nobody could play with nobody
could play with. So this would be
modifying not to go into space
necessarily, but just to sort of enrich
the diversity of the human species.
We're not doing genetic modification. So
he says he's English. You must trust him
to be honest. Yes. Thank you. Thank you.
Well done. Well, well played.
Wait. So, but can you is it the same
thing? Some particular types of drugs
are, you know, things that would
manipulate your genome. Um, that's how
people, you know, start to target some
diseases. This is not a class of drugs
we're working on. When we think about
the big ambition of solving all disease,
maybe this is something that we need to
be um doing over time as as we want to
really crack like the whole spectrum of
disease, right? Can is it even possible
to consider that without considering the
whole area itself as it all bleeds in
together at some point? Yeah, I mean we
need to understand the genome and and
all the effect how how you how changing
a particular base pair on your DNA is
going to change you know what proteins
are expressed or in what abundance and
how that all the knock on effect on the
pathways. you you really want this like
basically this virtual cell to be able
to manipulate this cell on a computer
right to do experiments there here's
what I want you like your cell template
that you talking about prioritizing and
I'm not asking much because it already
happens in the animal kingdom you know
for so long decades even centuries we
imagined ourselves at the top of some
evolutionary yeah tri
without any arrogance whatsoever yeah
and all right Yet a noot can regenerate
a limb and we can't. Yeah. And so it
seems to and they're vertebrates. So it
seems to me there ought to be some way
to extract from animals that do things
that we could benefit from and then make
that a priority. So people, especially
veterans who've lost limbs, right, in in
in conflict, uh so or or even geckos
with their sticky hands like maybe um I
could be Spider-Man one day. Well, so
organiz Prioritize that truck.
They'll become superheroes.
So the regeneration of limbs that's
that's got to be a protein thing going
on in there, isn't it? Yeah. I mean, you
know, all of our mechanisms are
proteins. Same for nukes as well. So
there is some mechanism there. I don't
know what it is. Okay. Yeah. But that
would be a mechanism to emulate if you
could. If you could. Yeah. And then
install it into our own physiology. It's
a big if. Yeah. It's a lot. Yeah. How
about this? Would you be able to look at
drugs that are already here and there
are some drugs that are just not well
tolerated and you be able to reconfigure
them in such a way that you get the
benefit of the drug without the side
effects. Yeah. Exactly. So you often
have these first generation of drugs
that do something but they have these
side effects. Then there's a big
opportunity to understand better how
these drugs work. things like alphab 3s,
things like our models that understand
toxicity of of drugs can then allow us
to potentially modify these to become
better drugs and have less side effects,
less toxic effects. Cool. Well, that's
going back through the medical catalog
and reanalyze it, which is exactly what
an AI would be perfect for, right?
Exactly. Yeah. Yeah. You guys are going
to make a lot of money, man. I don't
know how I get seen dollar signs. I see
some I get a huge company you want to
invest. You need to get a piece of this
company you guys are going to make. I
mean I can't even imagine the amount the
gobs and gobs of money more money than
cells in my body. This is amazing. You
we're in the doorstep of quantum
computing and I know what impact that
would have in my field. In your field
would it make your entire life's work
look like it was done on an abacus?
Yeah. I mean I mean this is this is
going to change things. I think open
question how this changes machine
learning like what can AI do with
quantum computing but for chemistry even
near-term there are some real
applications of quantum computers for
understanding the properties of small
molecule drugs because actually some of
the things that people do do today with
quantum computers is simulate simulate
these small chemical systems like we
actually even even in the company we
have a quantum simulation team um that
are you know not using quantum computers
but simulating know the the quantum
effects of molecules. Now if you had a
quantum computer that could work on that
scale you could use that instead. So wow
I think of so many needs on the frontier
of chemistry in modern society. Uh one
of them is you know what do we do with
all the plastic that's in our
environment that's still there in the
ocean. Is there some life form you can
create that'll digest the plastic and
turn it back into its original
molecules? Is are proteins something
that could be applied there? If not in
your world, then you're describing an
ability more than you're describing a
specific solution to a problem. You're
you're empowering the chemist in ways
never previously imagined. Yes. So you
can use the capability of of Alphafold
to understand, you know, understanding
structural proteins. People are using
this outside of drug drug design. People
people are using this for example to
create bacteria that have enzymes that
could potentially digest plastics like
you're talking about. You could think
about this for engineering um you know
more resilient types of crops these sort
of things. Yeah. So just like AI this is
a platform upon which you can rest the
technology of any field. So yeah that's
the amazing thing about the protein
folding problem. Once you start to solve
that you unlock so many new things for a
whole broad spectrum of science right
there's a lot of downstream benefits I
would say.
Okay, last thing. Here's the last thing.
How How do I How do I get a piece of
this coming? Chuck has got dollar signs
in his eye. How do I get a piece of
this? Last thing. La last thing. What is
the worst possible outcome of your work?
Oo, what a question.
What guard rails are necessary as we go
forward? Because any new technology with
awesome power comes awesome
responsibility. Yeah. I mean, I I think
um you know, you have this with AI, you
have this, you know, creating new
biology or or or chemicals, you know,
you you just need to think about how to
use this responsibly, like what you're
putting out into the world openly versus
what you um close off for, you know,
many safety reasons. So, I think there's
there's a lot of things to consider
there. Yeah. Cuz famously in one of the
Jurassic Park films, they withheld
lysine,
amino acid, from one of the dinosaurs in
case it escaped. Mhm. It would die
because it would need the lysine for its
survival. And that was a kind of a an
insurance plan that put in, but life
always finds a way. Yeah, there you go.
Anyway,
Maxwell Yatterberg.
Yeah. Thank you for joining us on Star
Talk. We're going to be watching your
company and Chuck wants a piece of it.
Yes. I don't know what that means. But
anyhow, this this is I'm delighted to
just be able to look through your lens
at the birth of an entire frontier in
human physiology. I mean, what a time
this is. No, thank you so much. Been
super super fun to talk. No, thank you.
Excellent. Excellent. All right, I think
we're done here. Mhm. Uh, this has been
another installment of Star Talk special
edition talking about AI, human
physiology, and the future of drugs. Oh
yeah, Gary. Good to have you always.
Pleasure, Neil. All right, Chuck. Always
a pleasure. As always, this has been
Star Talk Neil Degrass Tyson, your
personal astrophysicist. Keep looking
up.
[Music]